# FOCS Homework 11, for Day 12

You may edit your answers into this file, or add a separate file in the same directory.

If you add a separate file, please include the following at the top:

```
Student Name: Sawyer Vaughan
Check one:
[X] I completed this assignment without assistance or external resources.
[ ] I completed this assignment with assistance from ___
   and/or using these external resources: ___
```

## I. Formal Proofs

Use the rules of inference from class (reprinted below) to construct formal, numbered proofs of the following:

### 1.

Assuming _p -> q_ and _p -> r_, prove _p -> (q AND r)_

1. p -> q | Given
2. p -> r | Given
3. (~p v q) | 1, Conditional
4. (~p v r) | 2, Conditional
5. (~p v q) ^ (~p v r) | 3, 4, Conjunction
6. ~p v (q ^ r) | 5, Distributive
7. p -> (q ^ r) | 6, Conditional

### 2.

Assuming _p -> (q OR r)_ and _p -> (q OR NOT r)_, prove _p -> q_

1. p -> (q OR r) | Given
2. p -> (q OR NOT r) | Given
3. (~p v (q OR r)) | 1, Conditional
4. (~p v (q OR NOT r)) | 2, Conditional
5. (~p v (q OR r)) ^ (~p v (q OR NOT r)) | 3, 4, Conjunction
6. ~p v ((q OR r) ^ (q OR NOT r)) | 5, Distributive
7. ~p v ((q ^ (r OR NOT r)) | 6, Distributive
8. ~p v (q ^ T) | 7, Negation
9. ~p v q | 8, Identity
10. p -> q | 9, Conditional

## II. Truth tables

Use a truth table to show the equivalence of the assumptions and conclusion from problem 1, above:  Assuming _p -> q_ and _p -> r_, prove _p -> (q AND r)_

[Style note:  what is the canonical order of the rows in a truth table for three propositions?]

 p | q | r | p -> q | p -> r | p -> (q AND r)
 0 | 0 | 0 |   1    |   1    |  1
 0 | 0 | 1 |   1    |   1    |  1
 0 | 1 | 0 |   1    |   1    |  1
 0 | 1 | 1 |   1    |   1    |  1
 1 | 0 | 0 |   0    |   0    |  0
 1 | 0 | 1 |   0    |   1    |  0
 1 | 1 | 0 |   1    |   0    |  0
 1 | 1 | 1 |   1    |   1    |  1

## III. Tautology, satisfiable, contradiction

Which of the following are tautologies?  Satisfiable?  Unsatisfiable (contradictions)?

### 1. _(p AND q AND r) -> (p OR q)_

Tautology. If you have p and q, then you certainly have p or q, so p and q and r always implies p or q.

### 2. _((p -> q) AND (q -> r)) -> (p -> r)_

Tautology. This is just the trasitivity rule of inference.

### 3. _(p -> q) -> p_

Satisfiable. p = 1 and q = 1 satisfies this, although it isn't true in the case where p = 0 and q = 0.

### 4. _(p OR q OR r) AND ((NOT p) OR (NOT q) OR (NOT r)) AND (p OR (NOT q)) AND (q OR (NOT r)) OR (r OR (not p))_

Tautology. Pretend that there were some set of assignments that would make this result in False. r would have to equal 0, and p would have to equal 1 in order to not satisfy the OR at the end of the formula. These two assignments make all of the parts being AND'ed True, so the formula is True in every case.

### 5. [** challenge/optional] _(p <=> (q OR r)) -> ((NOT q) -> (p AND r))_



## IV. CNF

Transform the following formula into conjunctive normal form.  Show your steps.

_p OR (q AND NOT (r AND (s -> t)))_

1. p OR (q AND NOT (r AND (s -> t))) | Given
2. p OR (q AND NOT (r AND (~s OR t))) | 1, Conditional
3. p OR (q AND NOT ((r AND ~s) OR (r AND t))) | 2, Distributive
4. p OR (q AND (NOT (r AND ~s) AND NOT (r AND t))) | 3, DeMorgan's
5. p OR (q AND ((~r OR s) AND (~r OR ~t))) | 4, DeMorgan's (twice)
6. (p OR q) AND (p OR ((~r OR s) AND (~r OR ~t))) | 5, Distributive
7. (p OR q) AND ((p OR ~r OR s) AND (p OR ~r OR ~t)) | 6, Distributive
8. (p OR q) AND (p OR ~r OR s) AND (p OR ~r OR ~t) | 7, Associative

## V. Short certificate

Demonstrate that the formula in problem IV is satisfiable.  Explain whether you used a  "short certificate" or exhaustive enumeration to make this determination.

The formula is satisfiable with p = 1, and q, r, s, and t can be anything. For example. p=1, q=1, r=1, s=1, t=1 is a solution. This is a "short certificate" to the problem that allows us to see that it is satisfiable. I came up with this solution simply by inspecting the formula and realizing that _p OR something_ existed in every part of the formula.

[several problems adapted from Ullman FOCS ch12]
